'Catastrophe' as Central Europe deals with deadly floods
1 hour ago

Share
Malu Cursino
BBC News
Adam Easton
BBC Correspondent
Reporting fromPoland


0:40
Floods devastate parts of Romania and Czech Republic
Emergency services are shoring up flood defences in Central and Eastern Europe after torrential rainfall swelled rivers and damaged thousands of homes.
One person has died from drowning in Poland, prime minister Donald Tusk confirmed on Sunday.
Storm Boris also proved deadly in Romania on Saturday, where four people were killed during floods in the south-eastern region of Galati.
In the Czech Republic, flooding has led to evacuations and 51,000 households in the country's northern areas have been hit by power outages, Czech power company CEZ says. Flood barriers have gone up in the capital Prague.

"We are again facing the effects of climate change, which are increasingly present on the European continent, with dramatic consequences," Romanian President Klaus Iohannis said on Saturday.
Extreme precipitation is becoming more likely in Europe, as across much of the world, due to climate change.
A warmer atmosphere can hold more moisture, which can lead to heavier rainfall.
How climate change worsens heatwaves, droughts, wildfires and floods
The mayor of Slobozia Conachi, a village in Romania's Galati region, said 700 homes had been flooded.
"This is a catastrophe of epic proportions," Emil Dragomir said.
Getty Images Local residents rescue an elderly man (C) from the rising flood waters in the Romanian village of Slobozia Conachi, 14  September 2024. Getty Images
Flooding has overwhelmed Slobozia Conachi in Romania

EPA Firefighters build barriers with sandbags against flood water, near the river Biala Glucholaska, in Glucholazy, southwestern Poland, 14 September 2024. EPA
In Glucholazy, southern Poland, firefighters have been building sandbag barriers to protect residents near the river
In Glucholazy, in Poland's southwestern Opole region, the mayor of the town said the local river had overflowed its banks and was now flooding the town. He appealed to residents to evacuate to higher ground on Sunday.
Glucholazy resident Zofia Owsiaka, said everyone in the town was "scared" and there seemed to be "no hope of the rain stopping".
In Krakow, Poland's second largest city, residents have been offered sandbags for flood protection.
Speaking from the town of Klodzko, one of the worst affected areas in Lower Silesia near the Czech border, Mr Tusk said 1600 people in the district had been evacuated.
He urged other residents to cooperate with the emergency services when asked to evacuate their homes.
In the area, 17,000 people are without power, he said. In some locations, the mobile telephone signal is not working and the internet is down, so he said he had taken the decision to use Starlink satellites.
He said the first Blackhawk helicopter had been sent to the region’s capital, Wroclaw, where thousands of residents had to use the staircases of high-rise blocks because lifts were shut as a flood safety precaution, local media reported.
